\mt1 LAMENTATIONS
\c 1
\p
\v 1 Ah, how lonely lies the city, once so full of folk, once a power among the na­tions,
now like a poor widow!
Once she queened it over towns, and is now a thrall!—
    2 	sobbing sorely in the night, tears upon her cheek; of all her allies there is none to aid her;
her friends have all betrayed her and turned foes.
    3 	To an exile of sad slavery has Judah departed,' to settle among pagans, with no peace;
and in her anguish her pursuers overtook her.
    4 	The paths to Sion are woebe­gone,
bereft of pilgrims; her gates are all deserted, and her priests despair, her maidens have been dragged away—
ah, bitter is her lot!
    5 	Her foes have now the upper hand,
her enemies exult— it is her punishment from the Eternal
for her many sins.
Foes force her children into exile
in front of them;
    6 	from Sion all her splendour has departed;
her leaders are like harts that find
no pasture,
the pursuer drives them feebly in front of him.
    7 	Jerusalem recalls
her stress and scattering,
when helpless her folk fell into the foeman’s hand, and the foe gazed gloating on her downfall.
Jerusalem, for her dire sins, 8 is flung aside;
all who honoured her despise her—
they have seen her naked shame;
she moans the while, and turns her face away.
Her filth clung to her skirts, 9 she was a fetid rag; she never thought of what would follow, and so her fall was tragic.
“How insolent is the foe, O thou Eternal!
See what I suffer!”
The foe has laid his hands io on all her treasures; she has seen pagans pushing into her shrine,
men thou didst forbid to enter thy community.
All her folk are moaning	11
in the search for food, bartering their treasures for bare sustenance.
“Behold, O thou Eternal, how I am abased!
And you who pass by, look, 12 look all of you and see if there is any agony like this dealt out to me,
by the Eternal in his anger fierce afflicting me.
He sent a fever down	13
to waste my limbs; he spread a net to catch my feet;
he thwarted me; faint he left me and forlorn, all day long.
    14 	He singled out my sins,
then twisted them together, and bound them as a yoke upon my neck, till I am worn;
the Lord has consigned me to a foe
whom I cannot withstand.
    15 	My Lord himself has flouted
all my heroes,
summoning a triumphant host to shatter my warriors; in the winepress the Lord has been trampling upon Judah.
    16 	For all this I weep,
tears stream from my eyes; none beside me to relieve me, none to revive me; my children lie forlorn, for the foe has prevailed.”
    17 	Sion is stretching her hands
out,
but none relieves her; for the Eternal has ordered all around
to oppose Jacob, and Jerusalem is but to them a fetid rag.
    18 	“The Eternal is right,
for I did rebel!
But listen, 0 peoples, all of you,
look at my agony; my maidens and my youth are in captivity.
    19 	I cafled to my allies,
and they failed me; in the city my priests and sheikhs
are dying of hunger, searching for bare sustenance, and searching all in vain.
    20 	0 thou Eternal, consider my
anguish,
my soul is wretched, my heart writhing, and my vitals burn;
outside, the sword is slaying, and inside, the plague.
Listen to my moaning,	21
with none to relieve me.
My foes have all heard of my plight—
and they are glad of it, glad thou hast punished me, as thou didst threaten, for my sins.
But let their evil hour arrive, 22 let them fare as I fare; as thou hast done to me, so do to them— give them as many groans as mine,
a heart as sore!”
How the Lord has shamed in c% his anger maiden Sion,
hurling from heaven to earth the splendour of Israel, remembering not, on the day of his fury, his Footstool!
The Lord has ruined ruthlessly 2 the homesteads of Jacob, lowering and levelling the strongholds of Judah, degrading in his wrath her king and nobles.
He has shattered in fierce anger 3 all the force of Israel, withdrawing his right hand from them
as they faced the foe.
He has burned in Jacob like a fire,
devouring all around.
Like a foe he has bent his 4 bow,
and fitted his arrows; he slaughters and kills the chil­dren,
the delight of our eyes, in the tent of maiden Sion he pours out like fire his fury.
    5 	The Lord has become our
enemy,
ruining Israel, ruining all her citadels and shattering her strong­holds,
heaping upon maiden Sion wails and woe.
    6 	He has torn the fence down like
a robber,
demolished his own shrine, abolished within Sion feast and sabbath, spurned aside in indignation king and priest alike.
    7 	The Lord has discarded his own
altar,
scorned his sanctuary, and let the foe lay hands upon the ark of the compact.
What shouts they raised in the Eternal’s house, as in an orgy!
    8 	The Eternal was determined to
destroy
the walls of maiden Sion; he planned it all, his hand was in the havoc; rampart and wall—he made them all
lament and totter.
    9 	Her gates have sunk to the
ground,
her bars are broken.
Her king and nobles are exiled;
there is no law; her very prophets are without a vision from the Eternal;
    10 	they sit in silence on the ground,
the sheikhs of maiden Sion; _ and, with dust flung on their heads,
with sackcloth round their loins,
with head bowed to the ground, there sit the maids of Jeru­salem!
    11 	My eyes are worn with tears,
my soul is wretched, my heart is melting for the wreck of my people, for babies and infants swooning in the city-streets, crying to their mothers	12
for their food,
swooning like men wounded in the city-streets, gasping out their lives in their mothers’ bosom.
To what can I compare you, 13 dear Jerusalem?
To what can I liken you, for your comfort,
O	maiden Sion?
Your wreck is vast as the ocean;
who can repair you?
Your prophets? ah, their 14 dreams for you were false and flattering; they never made you see your sin, to save you from captivity— all the dreams they had for you
deceived you and misled you.
Now all who pass	IS
clap their hands over you, hissing and tossing their heads over maiden Jerusalem;
“So this is the peerless Beauty, the Joy of all the earth?”
Your foes, they are all yelling 16 against you,
hissing with clenched teeth,
“We have done for her!
This is the day we longed for!
It has come, we see it at last!”
The Eternal has done as he 17 planned,
has carried out his word, as he fixed long ago;
he wrecks you ruthlessly, makes foemen rejoice over you, and swells their forces.
Cry aloud to the Lord,	18
O	maiden Sion!
let your tears stream down by day and night, give yourself no respite, give your eyes no rest.
    19 	Rise and cry in the night,
as the night-watches come round,
pour out your heart like water before the Lord, lift hands of prayer to him over what he has done to you:
    20 	“Consider, 0 Eternal,
whom thou art handling thus! Are women to eat their children, the babes they have fondled? Are priests and prophets to be murdered in thy sanctuary?
    21 	All over the street they lie,
both young and old, my maidens and my youth killed without quarter, slain by thee, on thy day of anger, slaughtered without pity;
    22 	thou hast summoned the ter­
rors of war all around to a triumph,
till all whom I nursed and nur­tured
the foe has destroyed; not a soul escaped, not one sur­vived,
on the day of thine anger.”
    I 	am the man who has suf­fered
under the rod of his anger;
    2 	I am the man he has been lead­
ing
on a dark, unlighted road;
    3 	he has baffled me over and
again,
all the day long;
    4 	he has worn away my skin and
flesh,
and broken my bones;
    5 	he has piled troubles up against
me,
right round my head;
he has made me dwell in the 6 dark,
like men long dead; he has walled me round, till I 7 cannot go out,
he has loaded me with chains; and when I fain would cry for 8 help,
he stops my prayer; he blocks my way with boul- 9 ders,
till my course is twisted; he lurks for me like a bear, 10 like a lion in ambush; he has chased me, mangled me 11 and left me all forlorn; he has bent his bow and made 12 me
a target for his arrows; he has driven his shafts home, 13 right into me;
    I 	am the butt of all nations, 14 the burden of their satire all day long.
He has filled me up with bitter 15 herbs,
and sated me with worm­wood;
he has broken my teeth with 16 gravel,
and covered me with ashes.
He has bereft me of all bliss, 17
I forget what it is to prosper;
    I 	said, “My strength is gone, 18 and my hope in the Eter- nal!”
The thought of my stress and 19 scattering
is bitterness, bitter to me; my soul is always thinking of it, 20 and is crushed within me.
But I will call to mind,	21
to give me hope,
that the Eternal’s love is last- 22 ing,
and will never fail.
“Fresh every morning is thy 23 kindness,
great is thy faithfulness!”
    24 	The Eternal is my allotted
share, I say;
therefore I will hope in him.
    25 	The Eternal is good to those
who wait for him, to a soul that seeks him.
    26 	It is good to wait in silence
for the help of the Eternal;
    27 	it is good to bear without a word
the rebuke of the Eternal;
    28 	let a man sit alone in silence,
since it is the Eternal’s hand;
    29 	let him lay his lips to the dust—
there may be hope for him;
    30 	let him offer his cheek to the
striker,
and suffer all man’s taunts.
    31 	For the Lord will not always
discard life;
    32 	he wounds, but he has pity,
so rich is his love;
    33 	he is loth to pain or grieve
the sons of men.
    34 	When a whole people is taken
prisoner
and downtrodden,
    35 	when a man is deprived of his
rights,
under the eyes of the Most High,
    36 	when a man does not get jus­
tice—
does the Lord not see it?
    37 	Who can carry out his will,
unless it is the Lord’s order?
    38 	Are not weal and woe alike
decreed by the Most High?
    39 	Then why should mortal men
complain,	./
■when they are punished for their sins?	^
    40 	Let us scan and search our lives,
let us return to the Eternal,
    41 	lifting our hearts up with our
hands
to God in heaven;
    42 	“The sin is ours, we have rebelled,
and thou—thou hast not par­doned;
thou hast veiled thy face in 43 anger,
pursuing us without pity; thou hast covered thyself with 44 a cloud
no prayer can pierce; thou hast made us mere scum 43 and refuse in the world;
our foes, they are all yelling 46 against us;
dismay and destruction befall 47 us,
ravage and ruin.”
Tears are flooding from my eyes 48 for the ruin of my people; my eyes are sore with sorrow 51 for all the woes of my city; my eyes stream without ceasing, 49 without rest,
till the Eternal will look down 50 from heaven above.
They have chased me like a 52 bird,
with no reason for their hate; they dropped me to die in a 53 dungeon,
flinging stones at me; waters flowed over my head, 54 “I am lost,” I said.
From the depth of the dungeon 55 I called,
O Eternal, to thee; thou didst hear me crying, 56 “Give ear to my plea”; thou earnest at my call,	57
bidding me, “Fear not.”
O Lord, thou didst take my 58 part
and save my life.
And now thou seest my wrongs; 59 oh vindicate me!
Thou hast seen all the revenge 60 they plotted against me, hast heard all the insults	61
they plotted against me, the talk of the men who attack 62 me,
their muttering all day long.
    63 	Look at them, sitting or rising—
I am the burden of their satire!
    64 	Thou wilt requite them, O Eter­
nal,
for what they have done;
    65 	thou wilt blind their vision—
thy curse be upon them!—
    66 	thou wilt chase them angrily,
and crush them out of life.
Ah! how the gold is dimmed, the gold so pure! the sacred gems are scattered over every street;
    2 	the priceless sons of Sion,
worth their weight in gold, count no more than crockery, mere pots of clay!
    3 	Even jackals give the breast,
their whelps they suckle; but cruel are the women of my people
as the ostrich wild;
    4 	for the tongue of the nursling
cleaves for thirst to the roof of its mouth, the children beg for food, and no one gives it.
    5 	Those who fared on dainties
rot upon the street; those who lay on scarlet rugs huddle on an ash-heap.
    6 	The guilt of my people was
greater
than even the sin of Sodom— Sodom that fell in a flash, ere any could wring his hands.
    7 	Her headmen were brighter than
snow,
and whiter than milk, ruddier than rubies, their bodies veined like sap­phires;
    8 	and now they look more dark­
some than the night— none knows them as they pass—
their skin drawn tight over the bone,
dry as a stick.
Better to die by the sword 9 than by starving, stabbed to death by hunger suddenly in the field!
The hands of tender women 10 have sodden their own chil­dren—
making that their food, amid the wreck.
The Eternal has carried out his n fury,
venting his hot anger; he has lit a fire in Sion that burns her to the base.
None could believe, no king, 12 no man in all the world, that foe or enemy could ever en­ter
inside Jerusalem.
It was all for the sin of her 13 prophets,
for the crime of her priests, who shed in her the blood of the just.
Now, stained with blood, they 14 wander
blindly about the streets, brushing against men they once avoided.
Men shout to them, “Begone! 15 you are unclean! begone! avoid us!”
So they stagger and wander abroad,
finding no shelter; the Eternal himself has scat- 16 tered them,
caring nothing for them, regardless of the priests, and heedless of the prophets.
Our eyes are strained and fail- 17 ing,
as we look for aid unavailing;
we are watching for a nation that has never brought salva­tion.
    18 	Foes dog our steps,
we dare not walk abroad; our days are numbered and over,
for our end has come.
    19 	More swift were our pursuers
than eagles of the air, hunting us over the hills, ambushing us on the wolds;
    20 	they trapped the king, the Eter­
nal’s choice,
the very breath of our lives, of whom we said, “Under his reign
we shall hold out, among the nations!”
    21 	Rejoice and be glad in your
home-land,
O maiden Edom!
But the cup will come round to you,
and leave you drunk and dis­hevelled.
    22 	Sion, your guilt is over and
gone-
no more exile for you!
But, Edom, your guilt shall be punished,
your sins laid bare!
Consider our plight, 0 Eter­nal,
ah, look at our disgrace—
    2 	our heritage handed to foreign­
ers,
our homes to aliens;
    3 	fatherless orphans are we,
our mothers are like widows;
    4 	we must buy our own water,
our wood has to be paid for;
    2 	we surrendered to the foe,
thinking- to get food enough;
but they have borne hard on us, 5 we toil and get no rest.
Our fathers sinned; they are no 7 more,
but we must bear their guilt. Slaves now lord it over us, 8 with none to rescue us; we get in our corn at the risk 9 of our lives
from Arabs of the desert; our skin glows like an oven, 10 with the fever heat of famine. Women are ravished in Sion, 11 and girls in the towns of Judah; nobles hung up by the hand, 12 and sheikhs outraged.
Nobles stoop to grind at the 13 mill,
lords stagger with loads of logs;
no sheikhs now sit at the city- 14 gates,
no young men at their music! Gone all that gave our hearts 15 delight,
our dancing turned to mourn­ing;
the crown has fallen from our 16 head!
Ah, woe to us, for we have sinned!
And this makes our heart faint, 17
and this makes our eyes dim,
that Sion hill lies desolate, 18
with jackals roaming over it.
Thou art enthroned for ever, O 19 Eternal,
reigning from age to age.
Why wilt thou never remember 20 us,
forsaking us all these years? Restore us, O Eternal, let us 21 return;
renew our days as of yore— unless thou hast utterly dis- 22 carded us
in anger all too sore!
